---
templateKey: blog-post
id: c192eaba9fefc632acf87ed636593475
title: How the JVM works in Java
slug: /2018/05/01/about-calpa-liu/
date: 2018-05-01T03:48:03.125Z
description: A short description on the basic functionality of the Java JVM
headerImage: https://i.imgur.com/mich3dS.jpg
tags:
  - 閱讀
---

# About the JVM
Hello again. This is a short piece I wrote on how the JVM works, and the process of compiling Java code. Many of the points made here were taken from various other sources, and I tried to cite them as best as possible.

### Abstract
Java is a high-level programming language. This means that when one writes Java, it is written in a familiar sense. Plainly, it looks like English. This can be seen when one looks at funtions as as `if`, which clearly mirror their English equivelent - if the code in the if statement is true, the code enclosed by the funtion will run. 

High-level programming languages were made to abstract away the complexities of low level languages. The most well low level language is binary itself, consiting of only 1s and 0s. Of course, no one but hardware engineers actually programs using 1s and 0s but it is useful to know that there is a cascading world of abstracts starting from machine language and gaining complexity all the way up to modern high-level languages such as Java. If you would like to learn more about low-level languages and computer engineering, I would highly reccomend reading [this book.](https://www.nand2tetris.org/)

Nonetheless, high-level languages were made to make the job of the programmer simpler. Without these abstractions, it would be impossible to create extremely useful products like modern operating systems, cellular devices, and other objects we rely on on a day to day basis.

### Compilers
Most high-level languages use a "compile-link-execute" format, meaning that a piece of software called a compiler takes a program written in a high-level language and it parses it into a lower level-program (usually stored in an *object* file). These *object* files are chained together to create an runnable program which is stored in the RAM of a device through a linker (there is such a thing as a link error in low level machine programming). The main problem with this type of system is that the machine language stored in RAM must be specifically written to work with the hardware of that system, also known as the system platform (take an arbitrary Windows machine as an example of a platform). Not all CPUs are the same and many use different archetechures and therefore require different types of inputs. This means that one compiler will not usually work for every machine, a new compiler will need to be made and used for each specific architecture.

### Interpreters
Interpreters are very similar to compilers but attempt to avoid the  "compile-link-execute" sequence. Instead, they essentially compile each statement as needed, while the program runs. THere are very few high-level languages that primarily use interpreters, some of these are Lisp and Scheme. Interpreters, like compilers, are machine dependent.

A good analogy for the difference between compilers and interpreters is that a compiler would be a translator (as in someone who translates a book or other text) and an interpreter acts as just an interpreter, translating language on the fly. [1](http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~jcarroll/15-100-s05/supps/basics/history.html)

### Java's Compile-Interpret System
Java uses both an interpretor and a compiler for platform independence. The goal of Java is to avoid issues regarding system compatability. For example, if a C++ program is compiled on a Windows machine, it will not run on any other architecture. In contrast, the Java program will run on any other architecture with Java support (which is most). 

The way this works is by using the Java Virtual Machine, or JVM. High-level Java code is converted to bytecode, a non-platform-specific lower level language, which is written to run on this Java Virtual Machine. A virtual machine is simply a replica of a computer system embedded in another computer. Since Java files are compiled to bytecode, it means that they can be run on any systems that have a JVM. However, an interpreter is also needed. Bytecode is not executable on its own, and, well, the only purpose for writing code is to eventually execute it, so right now Java would be pretty useless. Java is actually executed using a Java interpreter. When you type `java` and then a command in terminal, you are invoking the Java interpreter which is a platform-specific program that links the bytecode to a specific platform on the fly.

### Conclusion
That is the long-winded explanation of why a Java JVM is necessary, but this explanation also points out the reasons for Java's existence, which is the fact that it is not platform-specific like most other high-level languages. This makes running apps much easier across various platforms, and it also mean that applets, which are web-based Java programs, can run consistently on any device.
